# Systems and Networking - Unit I - 2022-23

[News](#News) | [General Information](#General-Information) | [Syllabus](#Syllabus) | [Class Schedules](#Class-Schedules) | [Previous Years](#Previous-Years)

## News

- **Written Exam Session V (09/12/2023) - Grades**<br/> 
The outcomes of the test are available at the following <a href="../exams/2022-23/2023-09-12_grades.pdf" target="_blank">link</a>.
- **Written Exam Session V (09/12/2023)**<br/>
Registrations to the first written exam session are now open via Google Form at the following <a href="https://forms.gle/VHnyRpDNrAe8FRoB9" target="_blank">link</a>. You must log in to your institutional Google account to access the form. Please, notice that this poll closes on **Sunday, September 10, 2023, at 11:59 p.m. CEST**; only students who manifest their willingness to participate by that time will be allowed to attend the exam. If you change your mind and don't want to participate in this exam session anymore, please update your answer on the form accordingly, as this will significantly help me with the organization of the test.<br/>
As a reminder, this exam session is scheduled for **Tuesday, September 12, 2023, from 3:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. CEST** in **Aula Informatica 17**, located in Via Tiburtina, 205 ([map](https://goo.gl/maps/TgnJCWDfx2VQRo4u5)). However, notice that the time schedule above is **_tentative_**, and slight changes might occur if needed. For example, if the number of participants exceeds the room's capacity, there will be two consecutive rounds. Further details on how to attend this test will be therefore communicated close to the exam's date.<br/>
**NOTE:** _Students who are sure they will not attend this exam session **should not** fill out this form! Besides, everyone can decide to opt in by the closing date of this poll._
- **Oral Exam Session IV**<br/> 
The oral exam will take place remotely on a one-day session: **Thursday, 29 June, at 11:00 a.m. CEST**. Please refer to the instructions sent via the Moodle forum for further information.
- **Written Exam Session IV (06/27/2023) - Grades**<br/> 
The outcomes of the test are available at the following <a href="../exams/2022-23/2023-06-27_grades.pdf" target="_blank">link</a>.
- **Written Exam Session IV (06/27/2023)**<br/>
Registrations to the first written exam session are now open via Google Form at the following <a href="https://forms.gle/9PjW3UoQtm4VM4C27" target="_blank">link</a>. You must log in to your institutional Google account to access the form. Please, notice that this poll closes on **Sunday, June 25, 2023, at 11:59 p.m. CEST**; only students who manifest their willingness to participate by that time will be allowed to attend the exam. If you change your mind and don't want to participate in this exam session anymore, please update your answer on the form accordingly, as this will significantly help me with the organization of the test.<br/>
As a reminder, this exam session is scheduled for **Tuesday, June 27, 2023, from 3:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. CEST** in **Aula Informatica 17**, located in Via Tiburtina, 205 ([map](https://goo.gl/maps/TgnJCWDfx2VQRo4u5)). However, notice that the time schedule above is **_tentative_**, and slight changes might occur if needed. For example, if the number of participants exceeds the room's capacity, there will be two consecutive rounds. Further details on how to attend this test will be therefore communicated close to the exam's date.<br/>
**NOTE:** _Students who are sure they will not attend this exam session **should not** fill out this form! Besides, everyone can decide to opt in by the closing date of this poll._
- **Oral Exam Session III**<br/> 
The oral exam will take place remotely on a one-day session: **Monday, 12 June, at 10:30 a.m. CEST**. Please refer to the instructions sent via the Moodle forum for further information.
- **Written Exam Session III (06/07/2023) - Grades**<br/> 
The outcomes of the test are available at the following <a href="../exams/2022-23/2023-06-07_grades.pdf" target="_blank">link</a>.
- **Written Exam Session III (06/07/2023)**<br/>
Registrations to the first written exam session are now open via Google Form at the following <a href="https://forms.gle/ssEJKhSF3hoimJkC7" target="_blank">link</a>. You must log in to your institutional Google account to access the form. Please, notice that this poll closes on **Sunday, June 4, 2023, at 11:59 p.m. CEST**; only students who manifest their willingness to participate by that time will be allowed to attend the exam. If you change your mind and don't want to participate in this exam session anymore, please update your answer on the form accordingly, as this will significantly help me with the organization of the test.<br/>
As a reminder, this exam session is scheduled for **Wednesday, June 7, 2023, from 3:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. CEST** in **Aula Informatica 17**, located in Via Tiburtina, 205 ([map](https://goo.gl/maps/TgnJCWDfx2VQRo4u5)). However, notice that the time schedule above is **_tentative_**, and slight changes might occur if needed. For example, if the number of participants exceeds the room's capacity, there will be two consecutive rounds. Further details on how to attend this test will be therefore communicated close to the exam's date.<br/>
**NOTE:** _Students who are sure they will not attend this exam session **should not** fill out this form! Besides, everyone can decide to opt in by the closing date of this poll._
- **Oral Exam Session II**<br/> 
The oral exam will take place remotely on a one-day session: **Friday, 10 February, at 9:00 a.m. CET**. Please refer to the instructions sent via the Moodle forum for further information.
- **Written Exam Session II (02/07/2023) - Grades**<br/> 
The outcomes of the test are available at the following <a href="../exams/2022-23/2023-02-07_grades.pdf" target="_blank">link</a>.
- **Oral Exam Session I**<br/>
The oral exam will take place remotely on a two-day session: **Wednesday, 25, and Thursday, 26 January**. Both sessions are expected to start at **9:30 a.m. CET**. Please refer to the instructions sent via the Moodle forum for further information.
- **Written Exam Session I (01/19/2023) - Grades**<br/>
The outcomes of the test are available at the following <a href="../exams/2022-23/2023-01-19_grades.pdf" target="_blank">link</a>.
- **Exam Simulations Review on 01/12/2023**<br/>
The review of the exam simulations will take place on **Thursday, January 12, 2023, exclusively from remote** via Zoom from **9:30 a.m.**. To join this meeting, please follow the instructions provided in the message sent to you via the Moodle forum.
- **Remote-only Class on 12/07/2022**<br/>
Our next class will take place on **Wednesday, December 7, 2022, exclusively from remote** via Zoom at the usual time, i.e., from **1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m**. To join this meeting, please follow the instructions provided in the message sent to you via the Moodle forum.
- **Written Exam Session II (02/07/2023)**<br/>
Registrations to the first written exam session are now open via Google Form at the following <a href="https://forms.gle/3kx2ZX1EjQCaKot9A" target="_blank">link</a>. You must log in to your institutional Google account to access the form. Please, notice that this poll closes on **Friday, February 3, 2023, at 11:59 p.m. CET**; only students who manifest their willingness to participate by that time will be allowed to attend the exam. If you change your mind and don't want to participate in this exam session anymore, please update your answer on the form accordingly, as this will significantly help me with the organization of the test.<br/>
As a reminder, this exam session is scheduled for **Tuesday, February 7, 2023, from 4:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. CET** in **Aula Informatica 16**, located in Via Tiburtina, 205 ([map](https://goo.gl/maps/TgnJCWDfx2VQRo4u5)). However, notice that the time schedule above is **_tentative_**, and slight changes might occur if needed. For example, if the number of participants exceeds the room's capacity, there will be two consecutive rounds. Further details on how to attend this test will be therefore communicated close to the exam's date.<br/>
**NOTE:** _Students who are sure they will not attend this exam session **should not** fill out this form! Besides, everyone can decide to opt in by the closing date of this poll._
- **Written Exam Session I (01/19/2023)**<br/> 
Registrations to the first written exam session are now open via Google Form at the following <a href="https://forms.gle/xCaHezp5SbaMfmjH8" target="_blank">link</a>. You must log in to your institutional Google account to access the form. Please, notice that this poll closes on **Sunday, January 15, 2023, at 11:59 p.m. CET**; only students who manifest their willingness to participate by that time will be allowed to attend the exam. If you change your mind and don't want to participate in this exam session anymore, please update your answer on the form accordingly, as this will significantly help me with the organization of the test.<br/>
As a reminder, this exam session is scheduled for **Thursday, January 19, 2023, from 4:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. CET** in **Aula Informatica 16**, located in Via Tiburtina, 205 ([map](https://goo.gl/maps/TgnJCWDfx2VQRo4u5)). However, notice that the time schedule above is **_tentative_**, and slight changes might occur if needed. For example, if the number of participants exceeds the room's capacity, there will be two consecutive rounds. Further details on how to attend this test will be therefore communicated close to the exam's date.<br/>
**NOTE:** _Students who are sure they will not attend this exam session **should not** fill out this form! Besides, everyone can decide to opt in by the closing date of this poll._
- **Exam Dates**<br/>
The exam calendar is available at the following <a href="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ZIOfFYUO-3kqbcIlY-mubmlZfZnpXNrvnNT_ol3NgWM/edit?usp=sharing" target="_blank">link</a>.<br/> 
**Please, notice that there will not be any entry on Infostud associated with "Systems and Networking - Unit I".** Still, to make all our lives easier, I will circulate an **informal registration form** where you can express your intention to attend a specific exam session, amongst those listed in the calendar above.
- All the students that are willing to attend this class **must subscribe ASAP** to the Moodle web page of the course, as indicated [below](#Moodle-Web-Page). In addition, we remind students to fill out the dedicated [Google Form](https://forms.gle/TZYecGadZ6CDFhQj7) as specified [below](#How-to-Attend-Classes).
- Classes will start on **Wednesday, September 28 2022**. Students are kindly asked to refer to the class schedule at the following [link](https://corsidilaurea.uniroma1.it/cdlcontroller-orari-cdl/2022/30786).

## General Information

Welcome to the System and Networking - Unit I class!

This is a second-year, first-semester course of the [BSc in Applied Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence of Sapienza University of Rome](https://acsai.di.uniroma1.it/).

This repository contains class material along with any useful information for the 2022-23 academic year.

### Class Schedule
- **Wednesday** from **1:00 p.m.** to **4:00 p.m.** (Room 2L - Via del Castro Laurenziano, 7 [[map](https://goo.gl/maps/1x9rrSjsiieq41At6)])
- **Thursday** from **8:00 a.m.** to **10:00 a.m.** (Room 2L - Via del Castro Laurenziano, 7 [[map](https://goo.gl/maps/1x9rrSjsiieq41At6)])

### How to Attend Classes
As indicated by the latest rules provided by Sapienza, to prevent and contain the spread of COVID-19 infection, a "lightweight" contact tracing tool has been developed via a dedicated Google Form that can be filled anytime (before, during, or after classes).

This will help keep students and the entire Sapienza community safe. Therefore, we kindly ask students willing to attend classes in person to fill out the proper form that can be found at this [link](https://forms.gle/TZYecGadZ6CDFhQj7).

We thank all the students for their collaboration.

### Moodle Web Page
Students must subscribe to the Moodle web page using the same credentials (username/password) to access Wi-Fi network and Infostud services, at the following link: https://elearning.uniroma1.it/course/view.php?id=15524

### Office Hours
Please, drop me a message to <a href="mailto:tolomei@di.uniroma1.it">tolomei@di.uniroma1.it</a> if you like to arrange an in-person meeting or schedule a remote call either on Google Meet or Zoom. To issue your request, kindly specify "_SN-I 2022-23: Meeting_" in the subject of your message.<br/>
In-person meetings will be held in my office, which is located in Room 106 at the 1st floor of Building E in Viale Regina Elena 295 ([map](https://goo.gl/maps/5dSuQbvaeqXePV9y6)).

### Contacts
- Email: tolomei@di.uniroma1.it
- Website: https://www.di.uniroma1.it/~tolomei
- Bacheca Sapienza: https://corsidilaurea.uniroma1.it/it/users/gabrieletolomeiuniroma1it
- Office: Room 106 at the 1st floor of Building E in Viale Regina Elena, 295 ([map](https://goo.gl/maps/5dSuQbvaeqXePV9y6)).

### Description and Goals
The _Operating System_ (OS) is the key component of any modern computing device. Moreover, it very well represents a fundamental concept at the heart of any Computer Science curriculum, namely _abstraction_.

More specifically, by virtualizing the physical resources of a computer system, OS allows programmers to develop software applications without worrying about the nitty-gritty of the hardware. Decoupling the software from the hardware guarantees more flexibility for the system developer as well as greater usability for the end user.
It is therefore essential for any Computer Science student to have the ability to comprehend how to effectively and efficiently design and exploit the main functionalities of a highly complex software system, such as a modern operating system.

To this end, we will deeply discuss the key responsibilities of so-called general purpose OSs (i.e., those typically installed on our PCs and laptops). Amongst those responsibilities are: CPU scheduling, process/thread synchronization, memory management, file systems, just to name a few. In addition, we will explore how OSs should adapt to resource-limited mobile devices (i.e., tablets and smartphones).

All the concepts introduced are totally covered by the lecture materials provided during the course, and will be treated independently from a specific operating system implementation. However, many examples will be taken from popular OSs available on the market like UNIX/Linux, Windows, macOS, Android, iOS, etc.

### Prerequisites
- Fundamentals of computer architectures
- Basics of computer programming

### Exams
Written and oral exam.
Written exam consists of a Moodle quiz containing **20 multiple-answer questions**. Each correct answer accounts for 3 points, each wrong answer subtracts 1 point, whilst no answer gives no points. The quiz is successfully passed if the overall score is **greater than or equal to 15/30**. Those who obtain a score ranging between 15/30 and 17/30 must take a mandatory oral exam; instead, those who passed the quiz with a score of 18/30 or higher can decide to accept this as their final score or to take an additional oral exam.

### Recommended Textbooks
Despite they are **not** mandatory for successfully pass the exam, the following textbooks are really useful to anyone who wants to dig deeper into the subjects addressed in this course:
- _Operating System Concepts_ [Silberschatz _et al._];
- _Modern Operating Systems_ [Tanenbaum _et al._];
- _Operating Systems: Three Easy Pieces_ [Remzi] (<a href="http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/" target="_blank">freely available online</a>).
 
<hr>

## Syllabus
**Part I: Introduction**
- Basic concepts
- History of operating systems
- Relationship between operating systems and hardware
- Operating systems structures

**Part II: Process Management**
- Processes
- CPU Scheduling
- Threads

**Part III: Process Synchronization**
- Synchronization Tools
- Synchronization Examples
- Deadlock

**Part IV: Memory Management**
- Main memory (RAM)
- Virtual memory

**Part V: Storage Management**
- Mass storage devices
- I/O systems

<s>**Part VI: File System**
- File system interface
- File system implementation
- File system internals</s>

<s>**Part VII: Advanced Topics**
- Protection
- Security
- Distributed operating systems
- Mobile operating systems</s>

<hr>

## Class Schedules

| Lecture \# | Date | Topic                                         | Material       | 
|------------|------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------|
| Lecture 1  | 09/28/2022 | Basics and History of Operating Systems | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/01_Basics_and_History.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] |
| Lecture 2  | 09/29/2022 | Computer Architecture and OS Structures (Part I) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/02-03-04_Computer_Architecture_and_OS_Structures.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lecture 3  | 10/05/2022 | Computer Architecture and OS Structures (Part II) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/02-03-04_Computer_Architecture_and_OS_Structures.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lecture 4  | 10/06/2022 | Computer Architecture and OS Structures (Part III) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/02-03-04_Computer_Architecture_and_OS_Structures.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lecture 5 | 10/12/2022 | Process Virtual Address Space and PCB | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/05_Process_Virtual_Address_Space_and_PCB.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lecture 6 | 10/13/2022 | Basics of OS Process Management (Part I) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/06_Basics_of_OS_Process_Management.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] [<a href="./code/processes.tgz" download="processes.tgz">code</a>]|
| Lecture 7 | 10/19/2022 | Basics of OS Process Management (Part II) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/06_Basics_of_OS_Process_Management.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lecture 8  | 10/20/2022 | CPU Scheduling (Part I) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/07_CPU_Scheduling_1.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lecture 9  | 10/26/2022 | CPU Scheduling (Part II) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/07_CPU_Scheduling_1.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lecture 10  | 10/27/2022 | CPU Scheduling (Part III) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/08_CPU_Scheduling_2.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lecture 11  | 11/02/2022 | Threads (Part I) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/09-10_Threads.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] |
| Lecture 12  | 11/03/2022 | Threads (Part II) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/09-10_Threads.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] [<a href="./code/threads.tgz" download="threads.tgz">code</a>]|
| Lectures 13-14 | 11/09/2022-11/10/2022 | Process/Thread Synchronization (Locks) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/11_Synchronization_Locks.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lectures 15-16 | 11/16/2022-11/17/2022 | Process/Thread Synchronization (Semaphores and Monitors) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/12_Synchronization_Semaphores_Monitors.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] [<a href="./code/synchronization.tgz" download="synchronization.tgz">code</a>]|
| Lectures 17-18  | 11/23/2022-11/24/2022 | Deadlock | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/13-14_Deadlock.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>]|
| Lecture 19 | 11/30/2022 | Memory Management: Binding and Relocation | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/15_Memory_Management_Binding_and_Relocation.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] |
| Lecture 20 | 12/01/2022 | Memory Management: Contiguous Allocation and Paging | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/16-17_Memory_Management_Allocation.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] |
| Lecture 21 | 12/07/2022 | Memory Management: Advanced Paging (Segmentation) | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/18_Advanced_Paging.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] |
| Lectures 22-23-24 | 12/07/2022 - 12/14/2022 - 12/15/2022 | Virtual Memory and Page Replacement | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/19-20_Virtual_Memory.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] |
| Lecture 25 | 12/21/2022 | Mass Storage | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/21_Mass_Storage.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] |
| Lecture 26 | 12/21/2022 - 12/22/2022 | Disk Scheduling | [slides: <a href="./lectures/slides/22_Mass_Storage_Disk_Scheduling.pdf" target="_blank">PDF</a>] |
